README.md, before:

[![Node.js Version][node-version-image]][node-version-url]
[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/node-mysql-wrapper.svg)](http://badge.fury.io/js/node-mysql-wrapper)

# node-mysql-wrapper
#### [nodets:mysql for meteor](https://github.com/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper/blob/master/README_METEOR.md)
[![Gitter](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge)


## Table of Contents


- [Install](#install)
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Contributors](#contributors)
- [Community](#community)
- [Establishing connections](#establishing-connections)
- [Connection options](#connection-options)
- [Terminating connections](#terminating-connections)
- [Tables](#tables)
- [Performing queries](#performing-queries)
- [Table events](#table-events)
- [Extending a table](#extending-a-table)
- [Running tests](#running-tests)
- [Todo](#todo)

## Install

```sh
$ npm install node-mysql-wrapper
```

Sometimes I may also ask you to install the latest version from Github to check
if a bugfix is working. In this case, please do:

```sh
$ npm install nodets/node-mysql-wrapper
```

## Introduction

This is a node.js wrapper for node-mysql driver package. It is written in TypeScript, does not
require compiling (all JavaScript files you need are inside the 'compiled' folder).

Here is an example on how to use it:

```js
var mysql      = require('mysql');
var connection = mysql.createConnection({
  host     : 'localhost',
  user     : 'me',
  password : 'secret',
  database : 'my_db'
});

var wrapper = require('node-mysql-wrapper'); 
var db = wrapper.wrap(connection);

/* ES6: */
import {wrap} from "node-mysql-wrapper";
let db = wrap(connection);
/* END ES6*/

//or (without need of require mysql module) ->
//var db = wrapper.wrap("mysql://user:pass@127.0.0.1/databaseName?debug=false&charset=utf8");

db.ready(function(){
	//your code goes here	
	//users -> an example table inside the database, just call it like property:

	db.table("users").findById(8,function(user){
	    console.dir(user);

		//to destroy the whole connection, its events and its tables use: 
		db.destroy();
	
    }); //or using promises: findById(8).then(function(rowResults){...});
    

});
```

From this example, you can learn the following:

* Every method you invoke on a table is queued and executed in asynchronous way, using callbacks and/or promises.
* Closing the connection is done using `destroy()` which makes sure all remaining
  queries are executed before sending a quit packet to the mysql server.

## Contributors

Thanks goes to the people who have contributed code to this module, see the
[GitHub Contributors page][].

[GitHub Contributors page]: https://github.com/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper/graphs/contributors



## Community

If you'd like to discuss this module, or ask questions about it, please use one
of the following:

* **Chat**: https://gitter.im/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper
* **Mailing list**: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/node-mysql-wrapper
* **IRC channel**: http://irc.lc/freenode/node-mysql-wrapper/ 


## Establishing connections

The recommended way to establish a wrapped-connection is this:

```js
var wrapper =  require('node-mysql-wrapper');
var db = wrapper.wrap("mysql://user:pass@127.0.0.1/databaseName?debug=false&charset=utf8");

db.ready(function(){ 

});
```

However, a wrapped-connection can also be implicitly established by wrapping an existing mysql connection:

```js
var mysql      = require('mysql');
var connection = mysql.createConnection({
  host     : 'localhost',
  user     : 'me',
  password : 'secret',
  database : 'my_db'
});

var wrapper =  require('node-mysql-wrapper');
var db = wrapper.wrap(connection);

db.ready(function(){

});
```

Depending on how you like to code, either method may be
appropriate. But in order to works  always use .ready and a callback inside it.

## Connection options

Read them at the [node-mysql module](https://github.com/felixge/node-mysql/#connection-options) documentation



## Terminating connections

There are two ways to end a connection. Terminating a connection gracefully is
done by calling the `end()` method:

```js
db.end(function(err) {
  // The connection, table events and queries are terminated now
}); 
//Surely you can have a direct access to mysql connection from db.connection object, if you ever need it.
```

This will make sure all previously enqueued queries are still before sending a
`COM_QUIT` packet to the MySQL server. If a fatal error occurs before the
`COM_QUIT` packet can be sent, an `err` argument will be provided to the
callback, but the connection will be terminated regardless of that.

An alternative way to end the connection is to call the `destroy()` method.
This will cause an immediate termination of the underlying socket.
Additionally `destroy()` guarantees that no more events or callbacks will be
triggered for the connection.

```js
db.destroy();
```

Unlike `end()` the `destroy()` method does not take a callback argument.


## Tables

### Manual select which tables you want to use. (default all)

```js
 db.useOnly('users','comments',['or_an_array_of_tables','comment_likes']);
 //this goes before db.ready function.
```

### Getting a table object
```js
//all code you will see bellow goes inside db.ready(function () { //code here });
var usersTable = db.table("users"); //yes, just this :)
console.log('available columns: '+ usersTable.columns);
console.log('primary key column name: '+ usersTable.primaryKey);
console.log('find, findById, findAll, save and remove methods can be called from this table');

usersTable.find({mail:"= makis@omakis.com"},function(results){

});

```
## Performing queries 

### Method queries

They are 4 types of method queries, the find/findById/findSingle,findAll (select), save (insert or update), remove. All values you pass there are auto-escaped to protect the database from sql injections.

All methods return promises.
 
Column keys are auto converted to object properties, this means that user_id column on database table will be available as userId, same for table names too.

**Simple 'find by id' method** , this find method always returns  one result.
```js
db.table("users").findById(18,function(user){
	console.log("SELECT * FROM users WHERE user_id = 18");
	console.dir(user);
});
```
**Simple 'find single' method** , this find method always returns  one result.
```js
db.table("users").findSingle({mail:'= makis@ideopod.com'},function(user){
	console.log("SELECT * FROM users WHERE mail = 'makis@ideopod.com' LIMIT 1");
	console.dir(user);
});
```
**Simple 'find by' method** this find method always returns an array.
```js
db.table("users").find({yearsOld:'>= 18'},function(users){
	console.log("SELECT * FROM users WHERE yearsOld >= 18. results: ";
	console.dir(users);
});
```

**Simple 'find all' method** , which is the same as db.table("tablename").find({},callback); or .find({ tableRules : { limit :42 }} if rules passed.
```js
db.table("users").findAll({limit :42}).then(function(users){ 
	console.log("SELECT * FROM users LIMIT 42. results: ");
	console.dir(users);
});
```

**An 'advanced  find' method**. Find all users where years_old = 22, find the user's info, find user's comments, the comment's likes and users who liked them.
```js
var dbUsers = db.table("users");

var criteria = dbUsers.criteria
.where("yearsOld").gt(18)
.exclude("password","createdDate") //or .except(...columns). Removes that column(s) from the select query. 
.joinAs("info","userInfos","userId").at("info").limit(1) 
//with.at('tableOrPropertyName') we are going and passing criterias inside the info property
//this will pass the the result as object not as array, because of limit(1)
.parent() // or .original() here will be redirect to parent object, ( user(s) table) to continue our query...
//original() goes to the first-original-primary table, parent() goes to the parent table, you can have unlimited .at('joinedTableOrProperty') functions.
.join("comments","userId")
.at("comments")
.orderBy("commentId",true) //true if you want desceding ( ORDER BY COLUMN_KEY DESC )
.joinAs("likes","commentLikes","commentId")
.at("likes")
.joinAs("likers","users","userId").build(); 
//In order to go to parent table use : parent(),
//to go to primary-first-iriginal table use .original(),
//.build() builds all in correct order so you don't need to call parent() in this case. 

// .build() makes that : 
/*
var criteria= {
	yearsOld:'= 22', //where
	info : {  //joined table
		userId : '=' , //'=' means: put the parent object's property's value.
		tableRules: {
			table:'userInfos',
			limit:1
		}
	},
	comments: { //another joined table with it's own joined tables also
		userId: '=',
		
		tableRules:{
		    orderByDesc: "commentId" //ORDER BY comment_id DESC
		},
		
		likes: {
		    commentId: '=', //foreign key is comment_id. Where it's value is from comment object's primary key's value.
			
			tableRules{ //NEW 
				table: "commentLikes" //use commentLikes tables as 'likes' property
			}
		
			users: {
				userId : '=' 
			}
		} 
	}
};
*/

dbUsers.find(criteria,function(results){
	console.log('A lot of queries executed here, you can guess them :)');
	console.dir(results);
});
```

**Save method**,  Returns a single object, also updates the variable you pass into.
```js

var newUser = { username: 'a new user', yearsOld: 23, mail: 'newmail@mail.com' };

db.table("users").save(newUser).then(function(result){ //if you want use a promise
	console.log('New user just created, new userId:'
	+ result.userId+ ' which is the same as newUser.userId now:' +newUser.userId);
		
	result.username = 'an updated new username';	
	
	db.table("users").save(result,function(){
		console.log('User was just updated, because we have already a primary key setted at this object');
		
	});
		
});


```

**Remove method .1**

```js
//remove/delete all rows from users table where years_old = 22
db.table("users").remove({yearsOld:'= 22'},function(resultAnswer){
	console.log(resultAnswer.affectedRows+ ' rows removed from '+resultAnswer.table);
});
```

**Remove method .2** remove by id also

```js
//remove/delete a single row by its primary key
db.table("users").remove(4,function(results){
	console.log('we were just deleted a user with userId(user_id) = 4');
});
```



Also you can **wait for multiple query methods to finish** before you do something using db.when method:

```js
var findAUser = db.table("users").findById(16);
var findMoreUsers = db.table("users").find({username: '= a username'});
var findSomeComments = db.table("comments").find({userId:'= 16'});

//you can pass an array of promises too.
db.when(findAUser,findMoreUsers,findSomeComments).then(function(results) {
	/*
results -> results[0] -> findAUser (one object) , results[1]->findMoreUsers (array) results  , results[2] ->findSomeComments (array) results.
	*/

});
```

### Plain queries - the module's purpose is to never need to use this way.
To perform a plain custom query  call the `.query()` method on a wrapped-db  object.

The simplest form of .`query()` is `.query(sqlString, callback)`, where a SQL string
is the first argument and the second is a callback:

```js
db.query('SELECT * FROM `users` WHERE `user_id` = 18', function (error, results) {
  // error will be an Error if one occurred during the query
  // results will contain the results of the query
});
```
( to escape a value here just use db.connection.escape(value) )

## Table events

### on /watch

Each method/query will emit a `table` event when a new type of query executed and parsed. 
If you need to log or test results on the table before it gets used, you can
listen to these events: insert, update, remove (or delete) and save( for both insert and update) .

Note: Events are always executed before callbacks or promises.

```js
//users -> an example table on a database, call it like a normal function
var usersInsertWatcher = function(parsedInsertedRows){
	console.log('Somewhere an insert query executed on USERS table : ');
	console.dir(parsedInsertedRows);
};

var usersRemoveWatcher = function(deleted){
	console.log('Somewhere a remove/delete query executed on USERS table : ');
	console.log('Affected rows number: '+ deleted.affectedRows);
};

db.table("users").on('insert',usersInsertWatcher);
db.table("users").on('remove',usersRemoveWatcher); //and so on...
```

### off /unwatch

To turn off an event on a table just call db.table("tablename").off('event_type',the_callback_variable_to_remove)

```js
db.table("users").off('insert',usersInsertWatcher);
db.table("users").off('remove',usersRemoveWatcher);
```

## Extending a table

Any table can be extending to your own custom needs, with custom method queries, using this syndax:

### db.table("tablename").extend('functionName',theFunction);

An example is always better, let's suppose that we have a users table with some columns, one of these columns is the 'mail' column, and we want to find if a user  exists with a mail in our users table. Ofcourse we could use the already find method, but just for example purpose: 
```js

if(db.table("users").has('mailExists') === false) //not necessary
{
	db.table("users").extend('mailExists',function(mail,callback){
	//this = the users table, so this.name = 'users'
	var q= "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM " + this.name + " WHERE mail = " + 
	db.connection.escape(mail);
		
		db.query(q, function (err, results) {
            if (!err && results.length > 0 && results[0]["COUNT(*)"] > 0) {
                 callback(true);
                } else {
                  callback(false);
            }
       });
	});

}
```

### Use an extended method is simple
```js
	db.table("users").mailExists('an_e-mail@mail.com',function(exists){
		if(exists) console.log('this mail already exists!');
		else console.log('this mail doesnt exists.');
	});
```
## Running tests

### Import this database example to your local server, and have fan!
```sql

SET FOREIGN_KEY_CHECKS=0;

-- ----------------------------
-- Table structure for comments
-- ----------------------------
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS `comments`;
CREATE TABLE `comments` (
  `comment_id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `content` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  `user_id` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`comment_id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB AUTO_INCREMENT=5 DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

-- ----------------------------
-- Records of comments
-- ----------------------------
INSERT INTO `comments` VALUES ('1', 'dsadsadsa', '18');
INSERT INTO `comments` VALUES ('2', 'wqewqewqeq', '18');
INSERT INTO `comments` VALUES ('3', 'cxxzczxczcz', '22');
INSERT INTO `comments` VALUES ('4', 'e comment belongs to 23 usersa', '23');

-- ----------------------------
-- Table structure for comment_likes
-- ----------------------------
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS `comment_likes`;
CREATE TABLE `comment_likes` (
  `comment_like_id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `user_id` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  `comment_id` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`comment_like_id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB AUTO_INCREMENT=10 DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

-- ----------------------------
-- Records of comment_likes
-- ----------------------------
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('1', '18', '1');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('3', '18', '2');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('4', '12', '1');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('5', '16', '3');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('6', '18', '4');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('7', '16', '4');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('8', '16', '3');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('9', '18', '3');

-- ----------------------------
-- Table structure for users
-- ----------------------------
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS `users`;
CREATE TABLE `users` (
  `user_id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `mail` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  `username` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  `password` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  `created_date` timestamp NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  `years_old` int(11) DEFAULT '0',
  PRIMARY KEY (`user_id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB AUTO_INCREMENT=5624 DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

-- ----------------------------
-- Records of users
-- ----------------------------
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('16', 'an updated username for user_id 30  or 30 2nd time', 'an updated x username 1nd time', 'ewqeq', '2015-08-09 03:55:34', '21');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('18', 'an updated mail for user id 18 2nd time', 'an updated username for user_id 18 3rd time', 'a pass', '2015-08-08 22:58:49', '55');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('19', 'updated19@omakis.com', 'an 19 username', 'a pass', '2015-08-08 22:38:19', '22');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('20', 'mail20_updated@omakis.com', 'an updated20 username', 'a pass', '2015-08-08 22:58:48', '15');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('22', 'mail22@omakis.com', 'a username', 'a passing', '2015-08-08 22:38:13', '22');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('23', 'mailwtf@dsadsa.com', 'a username', 'pass', '2015-08-08 22:38:16', '22');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('28', 'an updated username for user_id 28  or 283rd time', 'an updated x username 2nd time', 'ewqewq', '2015-08-08 22:58:44', '15');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('31', 'an updated username for user_id 31  or 31 2nd time', 'an updated x username 1nd time', 'dsadsada', '2015-08-09 03:55:32', '0');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('5618', 'special@email.com', 'a special username', null, '2015-08-13 06:32:07', '23');

-- ----------------------------
-- Table structure for user_infos
-- ----------------------------
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS `user_infos`;
CREATE TABLE `user_infos` (
  `user_info_id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `user_id` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  `hometown` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`user_info_id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB AUTO_INCREMENT=5 DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

-- ----------------------------
-- Records of user_infos
-- ----------------------------
INSERT INTO `user_infos` VALUES ('1', '18', 'athens');
INSERT INTO `user_infos` VALUES ('3', '22', '22 user hometown');
INSERT INTO `user_infos` VALUES ('4', '23', '23 user hometown');

```



## Todo
*  Waiting for stable yield/*async support

## Licence

This project is licensed under the MIT license.

[npm-image]: https://img.shields.io/npm/v/node-mysql-wrapper.svg
[npm-url]: https://npmjs.org/package/node-mysql-wrapper
[node-version-image]: http://img.shields.io/node/v/mysql.svg
[node-version-url]: http://nodejs.org/download/
[travis-image]: https://img.shields.io/travis/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper/master.svg?label=linux
[downloads-url]: https://npmjs.org/package/node-mysql-wrapper

Commit message:

Update the readme for the new mysql-live package

README.md, after:

[![Node.js Version][node-version-image]][node-version-url]
[![npm version](https://badge.fury.io/js/node-mysql-wrapper.svg)](http://badge.fury.io/js/node-mysql-wrapper)

# node-mysql-wrapper
#### [nodets:mysql for meteor](https://github.com/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper/blob/master/README_METEOR.md)
#### [NEW mysql-live for live database collections, server and client side!](https://github.com/nodets/node-mysql-live)
[![Gitter](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge)


## Table of Contents


- [Install](#install)
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Contributors](#contributors)
- [Community](#community)
- [Establishing connections](#establishing-connections)
- [Connection options](#connection-options)
- [Terminating connections](#terminating-connections)
- [Tables](#tables)
- [Performing queries](#performing-queries)
- [Table events](#table-events)
- [Extending a table](#extending-a-table)
- [Running tests](#running-tests)
- [Todo](#todo)

## Install

```sh
$ npm install node-mysql-wrapper
```

Sometimes I may also ask you to install the latest version from Github to check
if a bugfix is working. In this case, please do:

```sh
$ npm install nodets/node-mysql-wrapper
```

## Introduction

This is a node.js wrapper for node-mysql driver package. It is written in TypeScript, does not
require compiling (all JavaScript files you need are inside the 'compiled' folder).

Here is an example on how to use it:

```js
var mysql      = require('mysql');
var connection = mysql.createConnection({
  host     : 'localhost',
  user     : 'me',
  password : 'secret',
  database : 'my_db'
});

var wrapper = require('node-mysql-wrapper'); 
var db = wrapper.wrap(connection);

/* ES6: */
import {wrap} from "node-mysql-wrapper";
let db = wrap(connection);
/* END ES6*/

//or (without need of require mysql module) ->
//var db = wrapper.wrap("mysql://user:pass@127.0.0.1/databaseName?debug=false&charset=utf8");

db.ready(function(){
	//your code goes here	
	//users -> an example table inside the database, just call it like property:

	db.table("users").findById(8,function(user){
	    console.dir(user);

		//to destroy the whole connection, its events and its tables use: 
		db.destroy();
	
    }); //or using promises: findById(8).then(function(rowResults){...});
    

});
```

From this example, you can learn the following:

* Every method you invoke on a table is queued and executed in asynchronous way, using callbacks and/or promises.
* Closing the connection is done using `destroy()` which makes sure all remaining
  queries are executed before sending a quit packet to the mysql server.

## Contributors

Thanks goes to the people who have contributed code to this module, see the
[GitHub Contributors page][].

[GitHub Contributors page]: https://github.com/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper/graphs/contributors



## Community

If you'd like to discuss this module, or ask questions about it, please use one
of the following:

* **Chat**: https://gitter.im/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper
* **Mailing list**: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/node-mysql-wrapper
* **IRC channel**: http://irc.lc/freenode/node-mysql-wrapper/ 


## Establishing connections

The recommended way to establish a wrapped-connection is this:

```js
var wrapper =  require('node-mysql-wrapper');
var db = wrapper.wrap("mysql://user:pass@127.0.0.1/databaseName?debug=false&charset=utf8");

db.ready(function(){ 

});
```

However, a wrapped-connection can also be implicitly established by wrapping an existing mysql connection:

```js
var mysql      = require('mysql');
var connection = mysql.createConnection({
  host     : 'localhost',
  user     : 'me',
  password : 'secret',
  database : 'my_db'
});

var wrapper =  require('node-mysql-wrapper');
var db = wrapper.wrap(connection);

db.ready(function(){

});
```

Depending on how you like to code, either method may be
appropriate. But in order to works  always use .ready and a callback inside it.

## Connection options

Read them at the [node-mysql module](https://github.com/felixge/node-mysql/#connection-options) documentation



## Terminating connections

There are two ways to end a connection. Terminating a connection gracefully is
done by calling the `end()` method:

```js
db.end(function(err) {
  // The connection, table events and queries are terminated now
}); 
//Surely you can have a direct access to mysql connection from db.connection object, if you ever need it.
```

This will make sure all previously enqueued queries are still before sending a
`COM_QUIT` packet to the MySQL server. If a fatal error occurs before the
`COM_QUIT` packet can be sent, an `err` argument will be provided to the
callback, but the connection will be terminated regardless of that.

An alternative way to end the connection is to call the `destroy()` method.
This will cause an immediate termination of the underlying socket.
Additionally `destroy()` guarantees that no more events or callbacks will be
triggered for the connection.

```js
db.destroy();
```

Unlike `end()` the `destroy()` method does not take a callback argument.


## Tables

### Manual select which tables you want to use. (default all)

```js
 db.useOnly('users','comments',['or_an_array_of_tables','comment_likes']);
 //this goes before db.ready function.
```

### Getting a table object
```js
//all code you will see bellow goes inside db.ready(function () { //code here });
var usersTable = db.table("users"); //yes, just this :)
console.log('available columns: '+ usersTable.columns);
console.log('primary key column name: '+ usersTable.primaryKey);
console.log('find, findById, findAll, save and remove methods can be called from this table');

usersTable.find({mail:"= makis@omakis.com"},function(results){

});

```
## Performing queries 

### Method queries

They are 4 types of method queries, the find/findById/findSingle,findAll (select), save (insert or update), remove. All values you pass there are auto-escaped to protect the database from sql injections.

All methods return promises.
 
Column keys are auto converted to object properties, this means that user_id column on database table will be available as userId, same for table names too.

**Simple 'find by id' method** , this find method always returns  one result.
```js
db.table("users").findById(18,function(user){
	console.log("SELECT * FROM users WHERE user_id = 18");
	console.dir(user);
});
```
**Simple 'find single' method** , this find method always returns  one result.
```js
db.table("users").findSingle({mail:'= makis@ideopod.com'},function(user){
	console.log("SELECT * FROM users WHERE mail = 'makis@ideopod.com' LIMIT 1");
	console.dir(user);
});
```
**Simple 'find by' method** this find method always returns an array.
```js
db.table("users").find({yearsOld:'>= 18'},function(users){
	console.log("SELECT * FROM users WHERE yearsOld >= 18. results: ";
	console.dir(users);
});
```

**Simple 'find all' method** , which is the same as db.table("tablename").find({},callback); or .find({ tableRules : { limit :42 }} if rules passed.
```js
db.table("users").findAll({limit :42}).then(function(users){ 
	console.log("SELECT * FROM users LIMIT 42. results: ");
	console.dir(users);
});
```

**An 'advanced  find' method**. Find all users where years_old = 22, find the user's info, find user's comments, the comment's likes and users who liked them.
```js
var dbUsers = db.table("users");

var criteria = dbUsers.criteria
.where("yearsOld").gt(18)
.exclude("password","createdDate") //or .except(...columns). Removes that column(s) from the select query. 
.joinAs("info","userInfos","userId").at("info").limit(1) 
//with.at('tableOrPropertyName') we are going and passing criterias inside the info property
//this will pass the the result as object not as array, because of limit(1)
.parent() // or .original() here will be redirect to parent object, ( user(s) table) to continue our query...
//original() goes to the first-original-primary table, parent() goes to the parent table, you can have unlimited .at('joinedTableOrProperty') functions.
.join("comments","userId")
.at("comments")
.orderBy("commentId",true) //true if you want desceding ( ORDER BY COLUMN_KEY DESC )
.joinAs("likes","commentLikes","commentId")
.at("likes")
.joinAs("likers","users","userId").build(); 
//In order to go to parent table use : parent(),
//to go to primary-first-iriginal table use .original(),
//.build() builds all in correct order so you don't need to call parent() in this case. 

// .build() makes that : 
/*
var criteria= {
	yearsOld:'= 22', //where
	info : {  //joined table
		userId : '=' , //'=' means: put the parent object's property's value.
		tableRules: {
			table:'userInfos',
			limit:1
		}
	},
	comments: { //another joined table with it's own joined tables also
		userId: '=',
		
		tableRules:{
		    orderByDesc: "commentId" //ORDER BY comment_id DESC
		},
		
		likes: {
		    commentId: '=', //foreign key is comment_id. Where it's value is from comment object's primary key's value.
			
			tableRules{ //NEW 
				table: "commentLikes" //use commentLikes tables as 'likes' property
			}
		
			users: {
				userId : '=' 
			}
		} 
	}
};
*/

dbUsers.find(criteria,function(results){
	console.log('A lot of queries executed here, you can guess them :)');
	console.dir(results);
});
```

**Save method**,  Returns a single object, also updates the variable you pass into.
```js

var newUser = { username: 'a new user', yearsOld: 23, mail: 'newmail@mail.com' };

db.table("users").save(newUser).then(function(result){ //if you want use a promise
	console.log('New user just created, new userId:'
	+ result.userId+ ' which is the same as newUser.userId now:' +newUser.userId);
		
	result.username = 'an updated new username';	
	
	db.table("users").save(result,function(){
		console.log('User was just updated, because we have already a primary key setted at this object');
		
	});
		
});


```

**Remove method .1**

```js
//remove/delete all rows from users table where years_old = 22
db.table("users").remove({yearsOld:'= 22'},function(resultAnswer){
	console.log(resultAnswer.affectedRows+ ' rows removed from '+resultAnswer.table);
});
```

**Remove method .2** remove by id also

```js
//remove/delete a single row by its primary key
db.table("users").remove(4,function(results){
	console.log('we were just deleted a user with userId(user_id) = 4');
});
```



Also you can **wait for multiple query methods to finish** before you do something using db.when method:

```js
var findAUser = db.table("users").findById(16);
var findMoreUsers = db.table("users").find({username: '= a username'});
var findSomeComments = db.table("comments").find({userId:'= 16'});

//you can pass an array of promises too.
db.when(findAUser,findMoreUsers,findSomeComments).then(function(results) {
	/*
results -> results[0] -> findAUser (one object) , results[1]->findMoreUsers (array) results  , results[2] ->findSomeComments (array) results.
	*/

});
```

### Plain queries - the module's purpose is to never need to use this way.
To perform a plain custom query  call the `.query()` method on a wrapped-db  object.

The simplest form of .`query()` is `.query(sqlString, callback)`, where a SQL string
is the first argument and the second is a callback:

```js
db.query('SELECT * FROM `users` WHERE `user_id` = 18', function (error, results) {
  // error will be an Error if one occurred during the query
  // results will contain the results of the query
});
```
( to escape a value here just use db.connection.escape(value) )

## Table events

### on /watch

Each method/query will emit a `table` event when a new type of query executed and parsed. 
If you need to log or test results on the table before it gets used, you can
listen to these events: insert, update, remove (or delete) and save( for both insert and update) .

Note: Events are always executed before callbacks or promises.

```js
//users -> an example table on a database, call it like a normal function
var usersInsertWatcher = function(parsedInsertedRows){
	console.log('Somewhere an insert query executed on USERS table : ');
	console.dir(parsedInsertedRows);
};

var usersRemoveWatcher = function(deleted){
	console.log('Somewhere a remove/delete query executed on USERS table : ');
	console.log('Affected rows number: '+ deleted.affectedRows);
};

db.table("users").on('insert',usersInsertWatcher);
db.table("users").on('remove',usersRemoveWatcher); //and so on...
```

### off /unwatch

To turn off an event on a table just call db.table("tablename").off('event_type',the_callback_variable_to_remove)

```js
db.table("users").off('insert',usersInsertWatcher);
db.table("users").off('remove',usersRemoveWatcher);
```

## Extending a table

Any table can be extending to your own custom needs, with custom method queries, using this syndax:

### db.table("tablename").extend('functionName',theFunction);

An example is always better, let's suppose that we have a users table with some columns, one of these columns is the 'mail' column, and we want to find if a user  exists with a mail in our users table. Ofcourse we could use the already find method, but just for example purpose: 
```js

if(db.table("users").has('mailExists') === false) //not necessary
{
	db.table("users").extend('mailExists',function(mail,callback){
	//this = the users table, so this.name = 'users'
	var q= "SELECT COUNT(*) FROM " + this.name + " WHERE mail = " + 
	db.connection.escape(mail);
		
		db.query(q, function (err, results) {
            if (!err && results.length > 0 && results[0]["COUNT(*)"] > 0) {
                 callback(true);
                } else {
                  callback(false);
            }
       });
	});

}
```

### Use an extended method is simple
```js
	db.table("users").mailExists('an_e-mail@mail.com',function(exists){
		if(exists) console.log('this mail already exists!');
		else console.log('this mail doesnt exists.');
	});
```
## Running tests

### Import this database example to your local server, and have fan!
```sql

SET FOREIGN_KEY_CHECKS=0;

-- ----------------------------
-- Table structure for comments
-- ----------------------------
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS `comments`;
CREATE TABLE `comments` (
  `comment_id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `content` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  `user_id` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`comment_id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB AUTO_INCREMENT=5 DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

-- ----------------------------
-- Records of comments
-- ----------------------------
INSERT INTO `comments` VALUES ('1', 'dsadsadsa', '18');
INSERT INTO `comments` VALUES ('2', 'wqewqewqeq', '18');
INSERT INTO `comments` VALUES ('3', 'cxxzczxczcz', '22');
INSERT INTO `comments` VALUES ('4', 'e comment belongs to 23 usersa', '23');

-- ----------------------------
-- Table structure for comment_likes
-- ----------------------------
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS `comment_likes`;
CREATE TABLE `comment_likes` (
  `comment_like_id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `user_id` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  `comment_id` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`comment_like_id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB AUTO_INCREMENT=10 DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

-- ----------------------------
-- Records of comment_likes
-- ----------------------------
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('1', '18', '1');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('3', '18', '2');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('4', '12', '1');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('5', '16', '3');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('6', '18', '4');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('7', '16', '4');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('8', '16', '3');
INSERT INTO `comment_likes` VALUES ('9', '18', '3');

-- ----------------------------
-- Table structure for users
-- ----------------------------
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS `users`;
CREATE TABLE `users` (
  `user_id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `mail` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  `username` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  `password` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  `created_date` timestamp NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  `years_old` int(11) DEFAULT '0',
  PRIMARY KEY (`user_id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB AUTO_INCREMENT=5624 DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

-- ----------------------------
-- Records of users
-- ----------------------------
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('16', 'an updated username for user_id 30  or 30 2nd time', 'an updated x username 1nd time', 'ewqeq', '2015-08-09 03:55:34', '21');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('18', 'an updated mail for user id 18 2nd time', 'an updated username for user_id 18 3rd time', 'a pass', '2015-08-08 22:58:49', '55');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('19', 'updated19@omakis.com', 'an 19 username', 'a pass', '2015-08-08 22:38:19', '22');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('20', 'mail20_updated@omakis.com', 'an updated20 username', 'a pass', '2015-08-08 22:58:48', '15');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('22', 'mail22@omakis.com', 'a username', 'a passing', '2015-08-08 22:38:13', '22');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('23', 'mailwtf@dsadsa.com', 'a username', 'pass', '2015-08-08 22:38:16', '22');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('28', 'an updated username for user_id 28  or 283rd time', 'an updated x username 2nd time', 'ewqewq', '2015-08-08 22:58:44', '15');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('31', 'an updated username for user_id 31  or 31 2nd time', 'an updated x username 1nd time', 'dsadsada', '2015-08-09 03:55:32', '0');
INSERT INTO `users` VALUES ('5618', 'special@email.com', 'a special username', null, '2015-08-13 06:32:07', '23');

-- ----------------------------
-- Table structure for user_infos
-- ----------------------------
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS `user_infos`;
CREATE TABLE `user_infos` (
  `user_info_id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `user_id` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  `hometown` varchar(255) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`user_info_id`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB AUTO_INCREMENT=5 DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

-- ----------------------------
-- Records of user_infos
-- ----------------------------
INSERT INTO `user_infos` VALUES ('1', '18', 'athens');
INSERT INTO `user_infos` VALUES ('3', '22', '22 user hometown');
INSERT INTO `user_infos` VALUES ('4', '23', '23 user hometown');

```



## Todo
*  Waiting for stable yield/*async support

## Licence

This project is licensed under the MIT license.

[npm-image]: https://img.shields.io/npm/v/node-mysql-wrapper.svg
[npm-url]: https://npmjs.org/package/node-mysql-wrapper
[node-version-image]: http://img.shields.io/node/v/mysql.svg
[node-version-url]: http://nodejs.org/download/
[travis-image]: https://img.shields.io/travis/nodets/node-mysql-wrapper/master.svg?label=linux
[downloads-url]: https://npmjs.org/package/node-mysql-wrapper
